content/posts/k8s-and-postgres.md, before:

+++
title = 'Is it safe to run Postgres on Kubernetes?'
date = 2023-10-26T00:09:29+05:30
draft = false
+++


Recently, I encountered an issue while restoring a backup of a PostgreSQL database running on a Kubernetes cluster that the restoration failed due to a bus error/SIGBUS.
```
LOG:  server process (PID 497) was terminated by signal 7: Bus error
```
A bus error is a signal raised by hardware when a process tries to access a part of memory that the CPU cannot address physically. This was the first time I encountered a bus error in Kubernetes, and I was curious to see what was causing it. So the Postgres pod/container is trying to access memory, which doesn't exist(or it's not accessible by the container 😉). The first thing to look for was resource limits/requests in pod spec and check if Postgres was trying to access/allocate more than the limit.

```
resources:
  limits:
    cpu: "2"
    hugepages-2Mi: 128Mi
    memory: 4096M
  requests:
    cpu: "2"
    hugepages-2Mi: 128Mi
    memory: 4096M
```
That seems fine, and Postgres was not trying to access more than 4GB of memory. After a quick search on Google, found that it could be [related to huge pages](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/71233). The solution mentioned in the issue was to turn off hugepages, which is not ideal because enabling hugepages can provide better performance for databases because you need to load fewer pages into memory.

### Quick detour
What is a hugepage, and why is it used in Postgres?

In Linux, Virtual memory and paging work together to manage memory efficiently and provide an abstraction layer between actual physical memory and the user space. Virtual memory address space is divided into fixed-size units called pages, and the physical memory is divided into fixed-size units called frames. Usually, both are the same size(4KB is the default page size on x86 systems). The page table stores the mapping between virtual and physical memory. When a CPU accesses memory using a virtual address, it must be translated to a physical address, which involves looking up the page table. Accessing page tables can be slow as page table resides in the main memory(RAM). To speed up the lookup/address translation, CPUs use TLB (Translation Lookaside Buffer), a small cache of recently used page table entries. TLBs are faster than page tables because they are smaller and specialized cache built within CPUs. When a CPU needs to translate a virtual address to a physical address, it first checks if the virtual address is in the TLB. If the translation is found in the TLB("TLB hit"), it just returns the physical address. If the translation is not found in the TLB("TLB miss"), it needs to access the page table to perform a translation, which is called a "page table walk", which is costly and time-consuming.


As the amount of physical memory increases(because of the clouds), the number of TLB entries required to manage the memory increases to provide better performance. So, to solve this, either you can increase the the size of TLB(not ideal) or increase the size of the pages from 4KB(hugepages).

Hugepages address this by using larger contagious memory blocks(e.g. 2MB or 1GB on x86 systems), so now a single TLB entry can map large memory space. By using hugepages with the same TLB size, more memory can managed with fewer TLB misses.


When memory is not tuned correctly, databases try to use up all the memory on the node and crash due to the OOM(Out Of Memory) killer. This is one of the top reasons for most of the PostgreSQL database crashes reported to Percona, and they have explained the reason and need for hugepages in this [article](https://www.percona.com/blog/why-linux-hugepages-are-super-important-for-database-servers-a-case-with-postgresql/).

> TLDR: 
    The page table gets bloated because it's trying to cache too many translations of smaller pages and consuming all the memory, including swap. A solution to this is to enable hugepages and tune the number of hugepages based on heuristics. This reduces memory consumption considerably, and the background processes won't be targeted by OOM Killer.

## How to confirm if it was due to hugepages

I was still unsure if the SIGBUS was because of hugepages in the Postgres pod/container. To confirm this, I had a simple plan.

- Allocate 128Mi/2Mi = 64 hugepages inside the pod and see if it works fine without error.
- Allocate 100 hugepages(which is more than the configured limit set on pod spec) - it should throw an error, right? It didn't 🧐
- Allocate 100 hugepages and try to write to the allocated memory

Wrote simple C programs to do this:


``` go
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>

#define PAGE_SIZE 2097152 // 2 MiB (size of a huge page)

int main() {
    void *addr = NULL;

    size_t num_pages = 100; // Number of hugepages

    addr = mmap(NULL, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB, -1, 0);

    if (addr == MAP_FAILED) {
        perror("Memory allocation in hugepages failed");
        return 1;
    }

    printf("Memory allocated in hugepages successfully!\n");


    // Unmap the memory when you're done with it
    if (munmap(addr, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE) == -1) {
        perror("munmap failed");
        return 1;
    }

    return 0;
}
```
alloc.c


This program just allocates the no of hugepages specified and prints whether the allocation was successful or not. When I ran this to allocate 64 and 100 pages, it successfully allocated for both runs. I was surprised how it could allocate more than 64 pages(the resource limit we have set). Upon checking the number of available hugepages on the pod, I found out it has the same number of pages as the host node and not the limit configured on the pod spec.

```
$ grep -i hugepage /proc/meminfo
HugePages_Total:      500
HugePages_Free:       460
HugePages_Rsvd:        40
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:       2048 kB
```

That's not good. So, Can a pod use up all the hugepages on the host node? Not actually. I wrote another C program which allocates memory and tries to write something to the allocated space.

``` go
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <errno.h>

#define NUM_PAGES 65
#define PAGE_SIZE 2097152 // 2 MiB (size of a huge page)
#define FILE_NAME "/dev/hugepages/hugepagefile"


static void write_bytes(char *addr)
{
    unsigned long i;
    unsigned long length = NUM_PAGES*PAGE_SIZE;
    for (i = 0; i < length; i++)
        *(addr + i) = (char)i;
}


int main() {
    void *addr = NULL;
    char buf[32];
    int fd;

    sprintf(buf, "%s", FILE_NAME);
    fd = open(buf, O_CREAT | O_RDWR, 0755);
    size_t num_pages = NUM_PAGES;

    addr = mmap(NULL, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB, -1, 0);

    if (addr == MAP_FAILED) {
        perror("Memory allocation in hugepages failed");
        return 1;
    }

    else{
        // when memory is allocated write to that space
        write_bytes(addr);
    }

    printf("Memory allocated in hugepages successfully!\n");

    // Unmap the memory when you're done with it
    if (munmap(addr, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE) == -1) {
        perror("munmap failed");
        return 1;
    }

    return 0;
}
```
writemem.c



![SIGBUS](/img/sigbus.png)

Now, running this on the pod triggered a SIGBUS/Bus error 🎉. So, a pod can allocate as many hugepages as the host node has but can't use all the allocated memory because of the limits configured in the pod spec. That explains why we got a Bus error while restoring the backup. Pod tried to allocate more than 64 hugepages, and it was successful. Postgres process tried to use that allocated memory, but the pod physically couldn't address the memory outside the configured limits and threw a Bus error. That sounds bad; when there's a SIGBUS, the process is terminated(as we saw in the original log), so all Postgres server processes are terminated, and this triggers an auto-recovery, which tries to start the Postgres server. There is a high chance that it might fail again because of a bus error. This can potentially corrupt the database 💀.

## How to overcome this and run postgres on k8s then?

Remember that you can configure no of hugepages via sysctl (`vm.nr_hugepages`). So, can't we just set the number of hugepages on a pod and call it a day? You can't configure or change all sysctl values in a pod; you should enable the sysctl on the kubelet via a kubelet arg `--allowed-unsafe-sysctls=<sysctl_name>`. But even with this, you can't configure the `vm.nr_hugepages` sysctl on the pod level because it's not namespaced. What this means is it can't be set independently for each pod on a node, and being namespaced is a requirement for sysctl to be accessible in a pod context. You might see something similar to this if it's not namespaced.

```
FATA[0003] Error: failed to run Kubelet: failed to create kubelet: the sysctl "vm.nr_hugepages" are not known to be namespaced
```

## Conclusion

So, is it safe to run Postgres databases on a Kubernetes cluster?

If you are running 1 Postgres database on a cluster, you can schedule the Postgres pods on particular nodes using taints and tolerations where you have enabled hugepages, and it can use all the hugepages of the underlying node. But if you want to run multiple databases on a cluster, then Postgres won't play nice with k8s; it's not very reliable, and you might face these issues. And obviously, you can always go back and disable hugepages and run multiple databases on a cluster; you'll lose all the performance advantages provided by hugepages, and the OOM Killer can crash the Postgres processes, as explained in the article by Percona.

I'm not a expert, if someone has a solution/work around for this issue, please let me know :)
### References

1. [More about page tables in linux](https://lwn.net/Articles/717293/)
2. [LWN article for hugepages](https://lwn.net/Articles/374424/)
3. [Configuring hugepages with crunchydata PGO](https://access.crunchydata.com/documentation/postgres-operator/latest/guides/huge-pages)

Commit message:

Add a update about the fix

content/posts/k8s-and-postgres.md, after:

+++
title = 'Is it safe to run Postgres on Kubernetes?'
date = 2023-10-26T00:09:29+05:30
draft = false
+++


Recently, I encountered an issue while restoring a backup of a PostgreSQL database running on a Kubernetes cluster that the restoration failed due to a bus error/SIGBUS.
```
LOG:  server process (PID 497) was terminated by signal 7: Bus error
```
A bus error is a signal raised by hardware when a process tries to access a part of memory that the CPU cannot address physically. This was the first time I encountered a bus error in Kubernetes, and I was curious to see what was causing it. So the Postgres pod/container is trying to access memory, which doesn't exist(or it's not accessible by the container 😉). The first thing to look for was resource limits/requests in pod spec and check if Postgres was trying to access/allocate more than the limit.

```
resources:
  limits:
    cpu: "2"
    hugepages-2Mi: 128Mi
    memory: 4096M
  requests:
    cpu: "2"
    hugepages-2Mi: 128Mi
    memory: 4096M
```
That seems fine, and Postgres was not trying to access more than 4GB of memory. After a quick search on Google, found that it could be [related to huge pages](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/71233). The solution mentioned in the issue was to turn off hugepages, which is not ideal because enabling hugepages can provide better performance for databases because you need to load fewer pages into memory.

### Quick detour
What is a hugepage, and why is it used in Postgres?

In Linux, Virtual memory and paging work together to manage memory efficiently and provide an abstraction layer between actual physical memory and the user space. Virtual memory address space is divided into fixed-size units called pages, and the physical memory is divided into fixed-size units called frames. Usually, both are the same size(4KB is the default page size on x86 systems). The page table stores the mapping between virtual and physical memory. When a CPU accesses memory using a virtual address, it must be translated to a physical address, which involves looking up the page table. Accessing page tables can be slow as page table resides in the main memory(RAM). To speed up the lookup/address translation, CPUs use TLB (Translation Lookaside Buffer), a small cache of recently used page table entries. TLBs are faster than page tables because they are smaller and specialized cache built within CPUs. When a CPU needs to translate a virtual address to a physical address, it first checks if the virtual address is in the TLB. If the translation is found in the TLB("TLB hit"), it just returns the physical address. If the translation is not found in the TLB("TLB miss"), it needs to access the page table to perform a translation, which is called a "page table walk", which is costly and time-consuming.


As the amount of physical memory increases(because of the clouds), the number of TLB entries required to manage the memory increases to provide better performance. So, to solve this, either you can increase the the size of TLB(not ideal) or increase the size of the pages from 4KB(hugepages).

Hugepages address this by using larger contagious memory blocks(e.g. 2MB or 1GB on x86 systems), so now a single TLB entry can map large memory space. By using hugepages with the same TLB size, more memory can managed with fewer TLB misses.


When memory is not tuned correctly, databases try to use up all the memory on the node and crash due to the OOM(Out Of Memory) killer. This is one of the top reasons for most of the PostgreSQL database crashes reported to Percona, and they have explained the reason and need for hugepages in this [article](https://www.percona.com/blog/why-linux-hugepages-are-super-important-for-database-servers-a-case-with-postgresql/).

> TLDR: 
    The page table gets bloated because it's trying to cache too many translations of smaller pages and consuming all the memory, including swap. A solution to this is to enable hugepages and tune the number of hugepages based on heuristics. This reduces memory consumption considerably, and the background processes won't be targeted by OOM Killer.

## How to confirm if it was due to hugepages

I was still unsure if the SIGBUS was because of hugepages in the Postgres pod/container. To confirm this, I had a simple plan.

- Allocate 128Mi/2Mi = 64 hugepages inside the pod and see if it works fine without error.
- Allocate 100 hugepages(which is more than the configured limit set on pod spec) - it should throw an error, right? It didn't 🧐
- Allocate 100 hugepages and try to write to the allocated memory

Wrote simple C programs to do this:


``` go
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>

#define PAGE_SIZE 2097152 // 2 MiB (size of a huge page)

int main() {
    void *addr = NULL;

    size_t num_pages = 100; // Number of hugepages

    addr = mmap(NULL, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB, -1, 0);

    if (addr == MAP_FAILED) {
        perror("Memory allocation in hugepages failed");
        return 1;
    }

    printf("Memory allocated in hugepages successfully!\n");


    // Unmap the memory when you're done with it
    if (munmap(addr, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE) == -1) {
        perror("munmap failed");
        return 1;
    }

    return 0;
}
```
alloc.c


This program just allocates the no of hugepages specified and prints whether the allocation was successful or not. When I ran this to allocate 64 and 100 pages, it successfully allocated for both runs. I was surprised how it could allocate more than 64 pages(the resource limit we have set). Upon checking the number of available hugepages on the pod, I found out it has the same number of pages as the host node and not the limit configured on the pod spec.

```
$ grep -i hugepage /proc/meminfo
HugePages_Total:      500
HugePages_Free:       460
HugePages_Rsvd:        40
HugePages_Surp:        0
Hugepagesize:       2048 kB
```

That's not good. So, Can a pod use up all the hugepages on the host node? Not actually. I wrote another C program which allocates memory and tries to write something to the allocated space.

``` go
#include <stdio.h>
#include <stdlib.h>
#include <unistd.h>
#include <sys/mman.h>
#include <fcntl.h>
#include <errno.h>

#define NUM_PAGES 65
#define PAGE_SIZE 2097152 // 2 MiB (size of a huge page)
#define FILE_NAME "/dev/hugepages/hugepagefile"


static void write_bytes(char *addr)
{
    unsigned long i;
    unsigned long length = NUM_PAGES*PAGE_SIZE;
    for (i = 0; i < length; i++)
        *(addr + i) = (char)i;
}


int main() {
    void *addr = NULL;
    char buf[32];
    int fd;

    sprintf(buf, "%s", FILE_NAME);
    fd = open(buf, O_CREAT | O_RDWR, 0755);
    size_t num_pages = NUM_PAGES;

    addr = mmap(NULL, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE, PROT_READ | PROT_WRITE, MAP_PRIVATE | MAP_ANONYMOUS | MAP_HUGETLB, -1, 0);

    if (addr == MAP_FAILED) {
        perror("Memory allocation in hugepages failed");
        return 1;
    }

    else{
        // when memory is allocated write to that space
        write_bytes(addr);
    }

    printf("Memory allocated in hugepages successfully!\n");

    // Unmap the memory when you're done with it
    if (munmap(addr, num_pages * PAGE_SIZE) == -1) {
        perror("munmap failed");
        return 1;
    }

    return 0;
}
```
writemem.c



![SIGBUS](/img/sigbus.png)

Now, running this on the pod triggered a SIGBUS/Bus error 🎉. So, a pod can allocate as many hugepages as the host node has but can't use all the allocated memory because of the limits configured in the pod spec. That explains why we got a Bus error while restoring the backup. Pod tried to allocate more than 64 hugepages, and it was successful. Postgres process tried to use that allocated memory, but the pod physically couldn't address the memory outside the configured limits and threw a Bus error. That sounds bad; when there's a SIGBUS, the process is terminated(as we saw in the original log), so all Postgres server processes are terminated, and this triggers an auto-recovery, which tries to start the Postgres server. There is a high chance that it might fail again because of a bus error. This can potentially corrupt the database 💀.

## How to overcome this and run postgres on k8s then?

Remember that you can configure no of hugepages via sysctl (`vm.nr_hugepages`). So, can't we just set the number of hugepages on a pod and call it a day? You can't configure or change all sysctl values in a pod; you should enable the sysctl on the kubelet via a kubelet arg `--allowed-unsafe-sysctls=<sysctl_name>`. But even with this, you can't configure the `vm.nr_hugepages` sysctl on the pod level because it's not namespaced. What this means is it can't be set independently for each pod on a node, and being namespaced is a requirement for sysctl to be accessible in a pod context. You might see something similar to this if it's not namespaced.

```
FATA[0003] Error: failed to run Kubelet: failed to create kubelet: the sysctl "vm.nr_hugepages" are not known to be namespaced
```

## Conclusion

So, is it safe to run Postgres databases on a Kubernetes cluster?

If you are running 1 Postgres database on a cluster, you can schedule the Postgres pods on particular nodes using taints and tolerations where you have enabled hugepages, and it can use all the hugepages of the underlying node. But if you want to run multiple databases on a cluster, then Postgres won't play nice with k8s; it's not very reliable, and you might face these issues. And obviously, you can always go back and disable hugepages and run multiple databases on a cluster; you'll lose all the performance advantages provided by hugepages, and the OOM Killer can crash the Postgres processes, as explained in the article by Percona.

I'm not a expert, if someone has a solution/work around for this issue, please let me know :)


### Update (5th Dec 2023)

This is fixed now in runc in this [merge request](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/pull/4077/) which is contained in the [1.1.10](https://github.com/opencontainers/runc/releases/tag/v1.1.10) release 🎉 and also fixed in [containerd 1.7.9](https://github.com/containerd/containerd/pull/9359). After upgrading to the new release, for the new fix to work on your containers/pods you should make a small config change in containerd, you need to set `disable_hugetlb_controller = false` in `/etc/containerd/config.toml` which is the default path for the containerd config. 

### References

1. [More about page tables in linux](https://lwn.net/Articles/717293/)
2. [LWN article for hugepages](https://lwn.net/Articles/374424/)
3. [Configuring hugepages with crunchydata PGO](https://access.crunchydata.com/documentation/postgres-operator/latest/guides/huge-pages)
